In this study we have analyzed the problem of non-fit between emerging
decentralized organization environments, and established EA methodologies
aimed to model organizations and specifically their linkages between
business and IT.

We have argued that modern organizations show strong tendencies toward
decentralization in their structures and management by following different
patterns, having in common the organizational forms fostering entirely new
relationships between processes and IT, as well as the management of IT
resources.

Current EA, providing methodologies to set up organization’s IT
architecture, management and evolution, fail to solve this major concern
in decentralized environments by helping organizations to address the
challenges related to changes required for, or issued by IT. We have
surveyed Zachman Framework, TOGAF and FEA, and concluded that the first is
unable to support any significant aspect of decentralization, while the
latter two provide some basic flexibility – in TOGAF, it is mainly
facilitated by the ability to have different architecture for
organizational units and by providing space for new methods for the
architecture development; in FEA, the conclusions are similar, while the
top-level organization standards need to be obeyed by all units.
Consequently, implementations of these methodologies are heavily limited
to promote, or even support new decentralized organization patterns
fostered by virtual organizations, collaborative networks, coopetitions,
and others.

The aim of this research is to contribute to a state-of the-art on
enterprise modeling methodologies by analyzing the decentralization of
organizations and supporting business patterns and technologies, and
thereby the consequences of this trend to the requirements for new
approaches to IT resources, namely, their use and management.
Regarding future work, our next steps involves contrasting the presented
theories and argumentations empirically, i.e. by mapping them to EA of
different organizations. Such an ongoing study concerns an organization in
the public sector of Sweden, exposing many of decentralized behavior as
discussed in this paper.